Phonology.md, before:

Phonology
=========

Phonemes
--------

/p t k/ /ɨ ɐ/

The way phonemes can be ordered is limited by these rules:

* There can not be more than two consonants or vowels in a row.
* Word final there can at most be one consonant in the coda.

Usually the ratio of consonants and vowels in a root words is limited by `C = V */ 2`. Exceptions are possible.


Allophones
----------

In general all allophony is optional, one might pronounce /tikap/ as [tikap], [tɨkɐp], [ʃɨɣäɸ] or anything in between.

In the "simple" register no allophony is used. The simple register occurs in dictating, teaching and talking to learners of the language and linguists or when talking about parts of the language.

|                   | Bilabial | Alveolar    | Velar   |
| ----------------- |:--------:|:-----------:|:-------:|
| Plosive           | p        | t           | k       |
| Flap              |          | [ɾ]         |         |
| Fricative         | [ɸ] [β]  | [ʃ] [s] [ʒ] | [x] [ɣ] |

| Ø | t | k | p |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|/ɨ/|[i]|   |[u]|
|   |   |[ə]|   |
|   |   |   |   |
|/ɐ/|[ɛ]|   |[ɔ]|
|   |   |[ä]|   |

1. At the beginning of a word consonants are pronounced as their basic form [p t k].
2. Between vowels they turn into their voiced version [β ɾ ɣ]. Alternatively they might just be voiced stops [b d g].
3. At the end of a word they turn into voiceless fricatives [ɸ s x].
4. Consonant clusters are realized voiceless as PF (Plosive, Fricative) word initial [ps px tɸ tx kɸ ks], and voiceless FP in between vowels [ɸp sp xp st ɸt xt xk ɸk sk].
5. Two of the same consonants at the beginning of a word take the forms [ts pɸ kx].
6. If /t/ is followed by /ɨ/ it becomes [ʒ] in between vowels. At the beginning and end of a word, following /ɨ/ it becomes [ʃ]. At the beginning of a word the cluster /tt/ becomes [tʃ] before /ɨ/.
7. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get rounded to [u ɔ] after /p/.
8. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get fronted to [i ɛ] after /t/.
9. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get lowered to [ə ä] after /k/.

Because of the wide free variation possible the language is often slurred and spoken with so little effort, that to an untrained listener it might not sound like a complex system of communication at all.

Orthography
-----------

Romanized orthography has two forms which differ in the way consonants are written.

In it's basic form consonants are written as they are /p t k/ always as < p t k >, vowels as < i a >.
The basic form is always used when talking about unaltered roots. e.g. "tikap"

The alternate form marks allophones. Voiceless [ɸ ʃ~s x] as < f s x > and voiced [β ɾ ɣ] as < v d g >. This is used in normal writing to differentiate words more easily. e.g. "tigaf"
Vowels are < u o > after /p/, < i e > after /t/ and < î a > after /k/, < i a > anywhere else.

Example:  
tikap atki tipai  
sigaf askî sivoi  
[ʃiɣäɸ ɐskə ʃiβɔɨ]

Commit message:

Remove î form spelling, plus small changes

Phonology.md, after:

Phonology
=========

Phonemes
--------

/p t k/ /ɨ ɐ/

The way phonemes can be ordered is limited by these rules:

* There can not be more than two consonants or vowels in a row.
* Word final there can at most be one consonant in the coda.

Usually the ratio of consonants and vowels in a root words is limited by `C = V */ 2`. Exceptions are possible.


Allophones
----------

In general all allophony is optional, one might pronounce /tikap/ as [tikap], [tɨkɐp], [ʃɨɣäɸ] or anything in between.

In the "simple" register no allophony is used. The simple register occurs in dictating, teaching and talking to learners of the language and linguists or when talking about parts of the language.

|                   | Bilabial | Alveolar    | Velar   |
| ----------------- |:--------:|:-----------:|:-------:|
| Plosive           | p        | t           | k       |
| Flap              |          | [ɾ]         |         |
| Fricative         | [ɸ] [β]  | [ʃ] [s] [ʒ] | [x] [ɣ] |

| Ø | t | k | p |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|/ɨ/|[i]|   |[u]|
|   |   |[ə]|   |
|   |   |   |   |
|/ɐ/|[ɛ]|   |[ɔ]|
|   |   |[ä]|   |

1. At the beginning of a word consonants are pronounced as their basic form [p t k].
2. Between vowels they turn into their voiced version [β ɾ ɣ]. Alternatively they might just be voiced stops [b d g].
3. At the end of a word they turn into voiceless fricatives [ɸ s x].
4. Consonant clusters are realized voiceless as PF (Plosive, Fricative) word initial [ps px tɸ tx kɸ ks], and voiceless FP in between vowels [ɸp sp xp st ɸt xt xk ɸk sk].
5. Two of the same consonants at the beginning of a word take the forms [ts pɸ kx].
6. If /t/ is followed by /ɨ/ it becomes [ʒ] in between vowels. At the beginning and end of a word, following /ɨ/ it becomes [ʃ]. At the beginning of a word the cluster /tt/ becomes [tʃ] before /ɨ/.
7. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get rounded to [u ɔ] after /p/.
8. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get fronted to [i ɛ] after /t/.
9. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get lowered to [ə ä] after /k/.

Because of the wide free variation possible the language is often slurred and spoken with so little effort, that to an untrained listener it might not sound like a complex system of communication at all.

Orthography
-----------

Romanized orthography has two forms.

Accurate spelling: In it's basic form consonants are written as they are /p t k/ always as < p t k >, vowels as < i a >.
The basic form is always used when talking about unaltered roots. e.g. "tikap"

Colloquial spelling: This alternate form marks allophones. Voiceless [ɸ ʃ~s x] as < f s x > and voiced [β ɾ ɣ] as < v d g >. Vowels are < u o > after /p/, < i e > after /t/ and < i a > after /k/ and anywhere else. This is used in every day writing to differentiate words more easily. e.g. "tigaf"

Example:  
tikap atki tipai (accurate)  
sigaf aski sivoi (colloquial)  
[ʃiɣäɸ ɐskə ʃiβɔɨ]
