README.md, before:

# Tikap

Tikap (might be pronounced like Teacup) is a conlang with five phonemes /p t k/ /ɨ ɐ/ (p t k i a). It's only goal is to make a functional language with this limited inventory.

In order to achieve this it tries to work with a small vocabulary and therefor oligosynthetic elements.

One very productive feature is its system of nonconcatenative morphology. In any root word consonants and vowels can be regrouped to form different patterns with new meaning. The order of consonants and the order of vowels however stays the same. Therefor the root word "tikap" can also have the forms "tkipa, tkiap, tikpa, itkap". Together with allophonic variation those five words can be pronounced quite different from each other [tɨɣäɸ txəβʌ txəɐɸ tɨxpʌ ɨskəɸ].

# Phonology
## Phonemes

/p t k/ /ɨ ɐ/

The syllable structure is (#C)CV(V)(C).

This means:
* CC Clusters are possible word initial and medial.
* Final only one consonant can appear.
* There are at most two vowels in a row.
* Geminates and long vowels are counted as CC and VV respectively.

Example:  
/ptaap.ti/
/iak/
/pia/
/tai.kiik/

Usually the ratio of consonants and vowels in a root words is limited by `C = V ± 1` . Exceptions are possible.

## Allophones

In general all allophony is optional, one might pronounce /tikap/ as [tikap], [tɨkɐp], [tɨɣäɸ] or anything in between. As a register the basic variant is used in dictating, teaching and talking to learners of the language.

|                   | Bilabial | Alveolar | Velar   |
| ----------------- |:--------:|:--------:|:-------:|
| Plosive           | p        | t        | k       |
| Flap              |          | [ɾ]      |         |
| Fricative         | [ɸ] [β]  | [ʃ] [s]  | [x] [ɣ] |

|   |
|:-:|
| ɨ |
|[ə]|
| ɐ |
|[ä]|

1. At the beginning of a word consonants are pronounced as their basic form [p t k]. Alternatively they might be aspirated [pʰ tʰ kʰ].
2. Between vowels they turn into their voiced version [β ɾ ɣ]. Alternatively they might just be voiced stops [b d g].
3. At the end of a word they turn into voiceless fricatives [ɸ s x].
4. Consonant clusters are realized voiceless as PF (Plosive, Fricative) word initial, and also voiceless FP in between vowels [ps px tɸ tx kɸ ks].
5. If a consonant or vowel is followed by itself it becomes geminated. 
6. Two of the same consonants at the beginning of a word take the forms [ts pɸ kx].
6. If /t/ is followed by /ɨ/ it becomes [ʃ] in between vowels. At the end of a word, following /ɨ/ it also becomes [ʃ]. At the beginning of a word the cluster /tt/ becomes [tʃ] before /ɨ/.
7. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get lowered to [ə ä] after /k/.
8. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get rounded after /p/ (depending on speakers preference).

## Stress

Primary stress tends to fall on heavy syllables. If there is only heavy syllable it falls on this one, for any case other than this stress is grammatical.

Example:
/ptaap.ti/ > /'ptaap.ti/
/ka.tik/ > /ka'tik/
/pa.ta.ta/ > /'pa.ta.ta/ /pa'ta.ta/ /pa.ta'ta/
/paipai/ > /'pai.pai/ /pai'pai/


# Grammar
## Morphology
### Grouping

Within a root word the order of consonants is fixed, as is the order of vowels. They however can be grouped differently in the boundaries the syllable structure allows. That is, consonants can form clusters and vowels can form clusters, or both can be equally spread out.

## Word order

Word order is VSO.

## Oligosynthetic structures
### Verb serialization

Verbs can be stringed together to indicate successive actions.

Example:  
"steal run dog fish."  
The dog steals fish and runs away.

### Noun incorporation

To indicate an action that involves a specific object or instrument, the noun can be prefixed to the verb. Giving rise to constructions similar to the English "baby-sitting".

Example:  
"fish steal dog."  
The dog is fish-stealing.

Commit message:

Describe syllables stress and grouping in a simpler manner

README.md, after:

# Tikap

Tikap (might be pronounced like Teacup) is a conlang with five phonemes /p t k/ /ɨ ɐ/ (p t k i a). It's only goal is to make a functional language with this limited inventory.

In order to achieve this it tries to work with a small vocabulary and therefor oligosynthetic elements.

One very productive feature is its system of nonconcatenative morphology. In any root word consonants and vowels can be regrouped to form different patterns with new meaning. The order of consonants and the order of vowels however stays the same. Therefor the root word "tikap" can also have the forms "tkipa, tkiap, tikpa, itkap". Together with allophonic variation those five words can be pronounced quite different from each other [tɨɣäɸ txəβʌ txəɐɸ tɨxpʌ ɨskəɸ].

# Phonology
## Phonemes

/p t k/ /ɨ ɐ/

The way phonemes can be ordered is limited by these rules:

* There can not be more than two consonants or vowels in a row.
* Word final there can at most be one consonant in the coda.

Usually the ratio of consonants and vowels in a root words is limited by `C = V ± 1` . Exceptions are possible.

## Stress

Vowels and combinations of vowels constitute syllable nuclei. Primary stress can fall on either of those, preferable on VV parts if present.

Example:
patata > /'pa.ta.ta/ /pa'ta.ta/ /pa.ta'ta/
paatta > /'paat.ta/
apatta > /'a.pat.ta/ /a'pat.ta/ /a.pat'ta/
aptaat > /ap'taat/

## Allophones

In general all allophony is optional, one might pronounce /tikap/ as [tikap], [tɨkɐp], [tɨɣäɸ] or anything in between. As a register the basic variant is used in dictating, teaching and talking to learners of the language.

|                   | Bilabial | Alveolar | Velar   |
| ----------------- |:--------:|:--------:|:-------:|
| Plosive           | p        | t        | k       |
| Flap              |          | [ɾ]      |         |
| Fricative         | [ɸ] [β]  | [ʃ] [s]  | [x] [ɣ] |

|   |
|:-:|
| ɨ |
|[ə]|
| ɐ |
|[ä]|

1. At the beginning of a word consonants are pronounced as their basic form [p t k]. Alternatively they might be aspirated [pʰ tʰ kʰ].
2. Between vowels they turn into their voiced version [β ɾ ɣ]. Alternatively they might just be voiced stops [b d g].
3. At the end of a word they turn into voiceless fricatives [ɸ s x].
4. Consonant clusters are realized voiceless as PF (Plosive, Fricative) word initial, and also voiceless FP in between vowels [ps px tɸ tx kɸ ks].
5. If a consonant or vowel is followed by itself it becomes geminated. 
6. Two of the same consonants at the beginning of a word take the forms [ts pɸ kx].
6. If /t/ is followed by /ɨ/ it becomes [ʃ] in between vowels. At the end of a word, following /ɨ/ it also becomes [ʃ]. At the beginning of a word the cluster /tt/ becomes [tʃ] before /ɨ/.
7. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get lowered to [ə ä] after /k/.
8. The vowels /ɨ ɐ/ get rounded after /p/ (depending on speakers preference).

# Grammar
## Morphology
### Grouping

"Grouping" changes the way consonants and vowel form clusters. Within a root word the order of consonants is fixed, as is the order of vowels. They however can be grouped differently into different syllables.
Therefor, for every number of consonants and vowels a root can have there are several patterns the phonology allows.

CV VC (ti it)  
CCV CVC (tki tik)  
CVV VCV VVC (tia ita iat)  
CVCV CCVV VCCV VCVC CVVC (tika tkia itka itak tiak)  
CVCVC CCVCV CCVVC CVCCV VCCVC (tikap tkipa tkiap tikpa itkap)  
VCVCV VVCVC VVCCV VCVVC CVVCV CVCVV VCCVV  
...

## Word order

Word order is VSO.

## Oligosynthetic structures
### Verb serialization

Verbs can be stringed together to indicate successive actions.

Example:  
"steal run dog fish."  
The dog steals fish and runs away.

### Noun incorporation

To indicate an action that involves a specific object or instrument, the noun can be prefixed to the verb. Giving rise to constructions similar to the English "baby-sitting".

Example:  
"fish steal dog."  
The dog is fish-stealing.
